w-12273311-Reuse types first draft (#235)
mulesoft/docs-dataweave: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-type-reuse-json-schema.adoc

= Reusing Types from a JSON Schema
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

> JSON schema is a standard providing a format for what JSON data is required for a given application and how to interact with it. Many existing data formats or types are expressed using this standard. In particular, REST APIs described by a RAML file are likely to have their types defined in JSON schemas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON Schema is a standard that provides a format for the JSON data required for a given application and how to interact with it. Many existing data formats or types are expressed using this standard. In particular, REST APIs described by RAML files are likely to have their types defined in JSON schemas.
```

Reviewer: Wondering if there's a way to tighten the passive voice here.

Reviewer: Not sure if Schema should be init cap. A quick google suggests yes.

Author: Reworded. First JSON Schema capitalized.

> To reuse predefined types, you can load the JSON schema into DataWeave to make the types structure available for use in your scripts.

Reviewer: type?

> The JSON schema loader parses schemas following the https://json-schema.org/specification-links.html#draft-7[JSON Schema Draft 7ˆ].

Reviewer: following -> using?

Author: Reworded.

== Import a Type from a JSON Schema

The following example shows a JSON schema (`Person.json`) in the resources directory: 

.JSON Schema (`example/schema/Person.json`):
[source,JSON]
----
{
  "$id": "https://example.com/person.schema.json",
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "title": "Person",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "firstName": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The person's first name."
    },
    "lastName": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The person's last name."
    },
    "age": {

>       "description": "Age in years which must be equal to or greater than zero.",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "description": "Age in years, which must be equal to or greater than zero.",
```

Author: Comma added.

      "type": "integer",
      "minimum": 0
    }
  },
  "required": ["firstName", "lastName"]
}
----

The following example shows how you can use the JSON schema loader to import the type:

> .DataWeave File Header:

Reviewer 2: This is part of the script header.

> The following example shows how you can use the JSON schema loader to import the type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to import the type using the JSON schema loader:
```

Author: Reworded.

----
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person
----

== Import Syntax

To import JSON schema types, use the following syntax, where:

> * `typeToImport`: You can use `\*` alone to import all types defined in the schema or you can export a single type from the schema using, for example, `Root`. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, `Root as Person`, which enables you to reference the type with that name in the script.

Reviewer 2: You are write, I meant import.

Regarding the bold, I used it to emphasize that those values could be used for this example, if using bold is meant for other cases, you can change it for whatever makes it consistent with other examples.

> * `typeToImport`: You can use `*` alone to import all types defined in the schema or you can import a single type from the schema using, for example, `Root`. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, `Root as Person`, which enables you to reference the type with that name in the script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `typeToImport`: Import all types defined in the schema using `*` or specify a single type, such as `Root` to import. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, `Root as Person`, which enables you to reference the type with that name in the script.
```

> * `typeToImport`: You can use `\*` alone to import all types defined in the schema or you can import a single type from the schema using, for example, `Root`. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, `Root as Person`, which enables you to reference the type with that name in the script.

Author: Modified.

> * `pathToJsonSchema`: To specify the path to the schema file, replace the file separators with `::` and remove the `.json` extension from the file name. For example, if the path to the schema is `example/schema/Person.json`, use `example::schema::Person`.

Reviewer: Maybe ignore these edits. I don't know if they're any better - trying to tighten up the first, but bloated the second to be parallel.

----
import _typesToImport_ from jsonschema!_pathToJsonSchema_
----

The following example shows how to import a type:

----
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person
----

== Use Your Types in a DataWeave Script

> Having this directive in the script header loads all the existing types in the JSON schema. In this case, the only existing type is the `Root` type, specified at the root which describes an Object that can have three properties (`firstName`, `lastName`, and `age`). It is equivalent to declaring the following type in your DataWeave script:

Reviewer 2: 1- It refers to the import directive from the previous example. 

2- It also refers to the above example : import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person

> Having this directive in the script header loads all the existing types in the JSON schema. In this case, the only existing type is the `Root` type, specified at the root which describes an Object that can have three properties (`firstName`, `lastName`, and `age`). It is equivalent to declaring the following type in your DataWeave script:

Author: Reword as:
1- Having the import directive from the above example in the script header...
2- In `import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person`, ...

> Having the import directive from the above example in the script header loads all the existing types in the JSON schema. In `import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person`, the only existing type is the `Root` type, specified at the root which describes an Object that can have three properties (`firstName`, `lastName`, and `age`). It is equivalent to declaring the following type in your DataWeave script:

Reviewer: Having -> Including?

Avoid directional terminology (above).

The second sentence is a long drink of water. Can you split it in two?

Avoid "it is" construction.

Author: Rewording.

.DataWeave Script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
type Root = { firstName: String, lastName: String, age?: Number }
----

> Notice that the `age` field is the only one that is optional, as indicated by the `?`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that `age` is the only optional field, as indicated by the `?`.
```

Author: Reworded.

> You can use the type to know if a value follows the structure defined by the JSON schema.

Reviewer: know -> verify? determine?

Author: Reworded.

The following example outputs the value `true` because the object contains the required fields, `firstName` and `lastName`:

.DataWeave Script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from jsonschema!jsonschema!example::schema::Person
---
{
 firstName: "John",
 lastName: "Doe"
} is Root
----

.Output:
----
"true"
----

> The following example outputs the value `false` since the object does not contain the required fields, `firstName` and `lastName`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example outputs the value `false` because the object does not contain the required fields, `firstName` and `lastName`:
```

Reviewer: Use "since" for time.
https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/display/MTDT/MuleSoft+CX+Writing+Style+Reference#MuleSoftCXWritingStyleReference-synonymsandwordswithmultiplemeanings

Author: Reworded.

.DataWeave Script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from jsonschema!jsonschema!example::schema::Person
---
{
 firstName: "John",
 age: 20
} is Root
----

.Output:
----
"false"
----

> == Use Definitions Inside Schemas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Use Definitions inside Schemas
```

Reviewer: (Per Chicago Manual of Style)

Author: Modified.

> Definitions inside JSON schemas are also loaded when the module is imported:

Reviewer: Any way to make active?

Author: @TomoDC what/who loads the definitions inside JSON schemas when the module is imported? 

If we know the "doer" of the action, we can make the sentence active.

Reviewer 3: It should be DataWeave

Author: The doer is DataWeave. Rewording to:
DataWave also loads the definitions inside JSON schemas when the module is imported.

.JSON Schema (`example/schema/Account.json`):
[source,JSON]
----
{
 "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-04/schema#",
 "definitions": {
   "address": {
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "street_address": {
         "type": "string"
       },
       "city": {
         "type": "string"
       },
       "state": {
         "type": "string"
       }
     },
     "required": [
       "street_address",
       "city",
       "state"
     ]
   },
   "person": {
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "firstName": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The person's first name."
       },
       "lastName": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The person's last name."
       },
       "age": {

>          "description": "Age in years which must be equal to or greater than zero.",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         "description": "Age in years, which must be equal to or greater than zero.",
```

Author: Comma added.

         "type": "integer",
         "minimum": 0
       }
     },
     "required": [
       "firstName",
       "lastName"
     ]
   }
 },
 "type": "object",
 "properties": {
   "person": {
     "$ref": "#/definitions/person"
   },
   "address": {
     "$ref": "#/definitions/address"
   }
 }
}
----

> You can import the types from that schema with the following directive, assuming the JSON schema is `example/schema/Account.json`:

Reviewer: The "assuming..." bit is a little awkward.
Maybe...
For example, to import the types ...

Or

If the schema (file?) is xxx, use the following directive...

Or maybe you don't need that bit starting with ", assuming" because it's already in the header?

Author: Reword the sentence by deleting the _assuming_ part.

----
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
----

> The types from that schema have the same effect as declring the following types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The types defined in the schema have the same effect as declaring the following types:
```

Author: Reworded.

----
type Root = { address?: address, person?: person }

type address = { street_address: String, city: String, state: String }

type person = { firstName: String, lastName: String, age?: Number }
----

Use the import directive to import a single type from the schema:

----
import address from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
----

> To avoid type name collision, you can use the `as` keyword to change the imported type name to use another name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid type-name collision, you can use the `as` keyword to change the imported type name to use another name:
```

Reviewer: (Here, you correctly use the article with the keyword name as an adjective.)

Author: Reworded.

----
import address as Account_Address from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
----

== Facilitate Usage with Pattern Matching

> You can use these types to take a specific action when an input is of a certain type. These imported types are useful for pattern matching.

Reviewer 2: The types imported from json schemas.

> You can use these types to take a specific action when an input is of a certain type. These imported types are useful for pattern matching.

Author: Reworded to: "You can use the types imported from the JSON schemas to..."

> The following example outputs the value `person` since the object is importing that type definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example outputs the value `person` because the object is importing that type definition:
```

Author: Reworded.

 
.DataWeave Script:
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
---
{
 firstName: "John",
 lastName: "Doe"
} match {
case is person -> "PERSON"
case is address -> "ADDRESS"
else -> "NO TYPE MATCHED"
}
----

.Output:
----
"PERSON"
----

> The following example outputs the value `address` since the object is importing that type definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example outputs the value `address` because the object is importing that type definition:
```

Author: Reworded.

> = Reusing Types from JSON Schema

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
= Reusing Types from a JSON Schema
```

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

> JSON schema is a standard providing a format for what JSON data is required for a given application and how to interact with it. Many existing data formats or types are expressed using this standard. In particular, Rest APIs described by a RAML file are most likely to have their types defined in JSON schemas.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
JSON schema is a standard providing a format for what JSON data is required for a given application and how to interact with it. Many existing data formats or types are expressed using this standard. In particular, REST APIs described by a RAML file are likely to have their types defined in JSON schemas.
```

> In order to reuse these already defined types, you can load the JSON schema into DataWeave leaving the types structure ready to be used in your scripts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To reuse predefined types, you can load the JSON schema into DataWeave so that the type structure is available to be used in your scripts.
```

> The JSON schema loader parses schemas following the https://json-schema.org/specification-links.html#draft-7[JSON Schema Draft 7].

Reviewer 4: Add the external link caret. I think it goes here, but not sure if I'm remembering correctly.

...`[^JSON Schema Draft 7]`

Reviewer 4: That gives the link a little icon that indicates that it goes to a page outside of our site.

== Import a Type from a JSON Schema

> Having a JSON schema in the resources: 

Reviewer 4: What do we mean by "Having a JSON schema in the resources:" here?

Reviewer 2: I meant that the below file example (Person.json) is in the resources directory.

> .JSON Script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.JSON Script:
```

Reviewer 4: Is this a JSON Script or a JSON Schema?

[source,JSON]
----
{
  "$id": "https://example.com/person.schema.json",
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "title": "Person",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "firstName": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The person's first name."
    },
    "lastName": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The person's last name."
    },
    "age": {
      "description": "Age in years which must be equal to or greater than zero.",
      "type": "integer",
      "minimum": 0
    }
  },
  "required": ["firstName", "lastName"]
}
----

> The following example shows how you can use the JSON schema loader to import the type:

Reviewer 4: Are we calling the schema a type? 

Would it make sense to say "... import a schema as a type" or something like that?

> .DataWeave file header

Reviewer 4: Is it a DataWeave _file_ header or _script_ header?

----
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person
----

== Import Syntax

> In order to import the JSON schema types, as shown above, use the following directive:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To import JSON schema types, use the following syntax:
```

----
import _typesToImport_ from jsonschema!_pathToJsonSchema_
----

> The following example shows how to import a type:

Reviewer 4: You might want to put the example before or after the "Where" bc the where describes the syntax.

----
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person
----

Where:

> * `typeToImport`: You can replace it by `\*` to import all types defined in the schema or to export a single type from the schema, for example, *Root*. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, *Root as Person*. This way you can reference the type with that name in the script.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `typeToImport`: You can use `\*` to import all types defined in the schema or to export a single type from the schema, for example, *Root*. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, *Root as Person*, which enables you to reference the type with that name in the script.
```

Reviewer 4: do you "export a single type" or _import_ a single type?

Reviewer 4: Do we literally use in the directive `*Root*` or is that a placeholder?

> * `pathToJsonSchema`: This represents the path to the schema file, modifying the file separators for `::` and removing the “.json” extension from the file name. For example, if the path to the schema is “example/schema/Person.json”, “example::schema::Person” must be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `pathToJsonSchema`:  To specify the path to the schema file, replace the file separators with `::` and remove the `.json` extension from the file name. For example, if the path to the schema is `example/schema/Person.json`, use `example::schema::Person`.
```

== Use Your Types in a DataWeave Script

> Having this directive in the script header loads all the existing types in the JSON schema. In this case, the only existing type is the *Root* type, specified at the root which describes an Object that can have three properties (`firstName`, `lastName`, and `age`). It is equivalent to declaring the following type in your DataWeave script:

Reviewer 4: "this directive" means which directive?

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit confused by the paragraph. It's saying that the type definition in the DataWeave script describes and object with three fields. I'm just not clear what it's comparing that DataWeave type definition to.

Reviewer 4: *Root* -> `Root` type
because I think it's referring to `type Root` in the script. The asterisks make that bold in the HTML and lack the code font.

> .DataWeave Script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.DataWeave Script:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
type Root = { firstName: String, lastName: String, age?: Number }
----

> Notice that the age field is the only one that is optional and it is signaled by the `?`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Notice that the age field is the only one that is optional, as indicated by the `?`.
```

> This is how you can use the type to know if a value follows the structure defined by the JSON schema.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use the type to know if a value follows the structure defined by the JSON schema.
```

> The following example outputs the value `true` since the object contains the required fields, `firstName` and `lastName`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example outputs the value `true` because the object contains the required fields, `firstName` and `lastName`:
```

> .DataWeave Script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.DataWeave Script:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from jsonschema!jsonschema!example::schema::Person
---
{
 firstName: "John",
 lastName: "Doe"
} is Root
----

> .Output

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.Output:
```

----

> "True"

Reviewer 4: It outputs the string "True," not a Boolean?

Reviewer 2: Yes, this should be as duke suggested. true

Author: Replaced with `true`.

----

> The following example outputs the value `false` since the object does not contain the required fields, `firstName` and `lastName`:

Reviewer 4: Is the value `false` or `"False"`? I suspect it's `false` both here and in the output but can't test.

Reviewer 2: Same as above, the value is: false .

Author: Replaced with `false`

.DataWeave Script
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from jsonschema!jsonschema!example::schema::Person
---
{
 firstName: "John",
 age: 20
} is Root
----

.Output
----

> "False"

Reviewer 4: same here, a string, not a Boolean?
I can't test it

Author: Modified to `false`.

----

== Use Definitions Inside Schemas

Definitions inside JSON schemas are also loaded when the module is imported:

> .JSON Script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.JSON Schema
```

[source,JSON]
----
{
 "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-04/schema#",
 "definitions": {
   "address": {
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "street_address": {
         "type": "string"
       },
       "city": {
         "type": "string"
       },
       "state": {
         "type": "string"
       }
     },
     "required": [
       "street_address",
       "city",
       "state"
     ]
   },
   "person": {
     "type": "object",
     "properties": {
       "firstName": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The person's first name."
       },
       "lastName": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The person's last name."
       },
       "age": {
         "description": "Age in years which must be equal to or greater than zero.",
         "type": "integer",
         "minimum": 0
       }
     },
     "required": [
       "firstName",
       "lastName"
     ]
   }
 },
 "type": "object",
 "properties": {
   "person": {
     "$ref": "#/definitions/person"
   },
   "address": {
     "$ref": "#/definitions/address"
   }
 }
}
----

> You can import the types from that schema with the following directive:

Reviewer 4: Can we say something like we're assuming the path to the schema above is example/schema/Account.json or something so that we could use that directive to import all the types from it?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can import the types from that schema with the following directive, assuming the JSON schema is `example/schema/Account.json`:
```

Reviewer 2: yes, that would be clearer.

Author: Modification added.

----
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
----

> Which has the same effect as declaring these types:

Reviewer 4: Suggest making this ("Which has ...:") a complete sentence.

----
type Root = { address?: address, person?: person }

type address = { street_address: String, city: String, state: String }

type person = { firstName: String, lastName: String, age?: Number }
----

Use the import directive to import a single type from the schema:

----

> Import address from jsonschema!example::schema::Account

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import address from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
```

Reviewer 4: Pls verify that it should be `import`, not `Import` everywhere in this doc

----

> You can change the imported type name to use another name in the script. This helps to avoid the name from clashing with others:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To avoid type name collisions, you can change the imported type name to use another name in the script:
```

----

> Import address as Account_Address from jsonschema!example::schema::Account

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import address as Account_Address from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
```

----

== Facilitate Usage with Pattern Matching

> You can use reuse types to take a specific action when an input is of a certain type. These imported types are useful to apply pattern matching.

Reviewer 4: Is "use reuse" correct?

Reviewer 4: "useful to apply" -> "useful for"

> The following example outputs the value `person` since the object is importing that type definition:

Reviewer 4: is the value `person` or `"Person"` or `"PERSON"`?

Reviewer 4: Is it "since the object matches the `person` type in `Account`"?

Reviewer 2: the name of the type, is person . No quotes , no upperCase.

the string used for the pattern matching as result uses quotes and all uppercase . "PERSON"

The output should show "PERSON" (the result string from the pattern matching)

Author: Leaving `person` in line 215.
Modifying to "PERSON" in line 235.

> .DataWeave Script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.DataWeave Script:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

> import * from import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Account

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
```

---
{
 firstName: "John",
 lastName: "Doe"
} match {
case is person -> "PERSON"
case is address -> "ADDRESS"
else -> "NO TYPE MATCHED"
}
----

> .Output

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.Output:
```

----

> "Person"

Reviewer 4: "Person" or `person`?

> "Person"

Reviewer 4: is the value `person` or `"Person"` or `"PERSON"`?

Author: Modified to "PERSON".

----

> The following example outputs the value `address` since the object is importing that type definition:

Reviewer 4: similar question: Is it `address`, `"Address"`, or `"ADDRESS"`? 
and is it importing the `address` type definition from `Account`?

Reviewer 2: same as above.

the type is : address
the string for the pattern matching and output is "ADDRESS"

Author: Applying changes as described above.

> .DataWeave Script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.DataWeave Script:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0
import * from import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Account
---
{
 street_address: "742 Evergreen Terrace",
 city: "Gotham",
 State: "OH"
} match {
case is person -> "PERSON"
case is address -> "ADDRESS"
else -> "NO TYPE MATCHED"
}
----

> .Output

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.Output:
```

----

> "Address"

Reviewer 4: similar question: Is it outputting `address`, "Address", or "ADDRESS"?

Author: "ADDRESS"
